===default__wiki__article__introduction__heading===

===Thunderbirds (TV series)===

===Thunderbirds (TV series) //  // Special effects===
The effects for all the APF series from "Supercar" to "UFO" were directed by Derek Meddings, who later worked on the "James Bond" and "Superman" films. Knowing that "Thunderbirds" would be the "biggest project [APF] had worked on", Meddings found himself struggling to manage his workload with the single filming unit that had produced all the effects for "Stingray". He therefore established a second unit under technician Brian Johncock, and a third exclusively for filming airborne sequences. This expansion increased the number of APF crews and stages to five each. A typical episode contained around 100 effects shots; Meddings' team completed up to 18 per day.

An addition to the effects department was Mike Trim, who served as Meddings' assistant in designing vehicles and buildings. Meddings and Trim jointly pioneered an "organic" design technique in which the exteriors of models and sets were customised with parts from model kits and children's toys. Models and sets were also "dirtied down" with powder paint or pencil lead to create a used look. Toy cars and vans were used in long shot, while scale vehicles were equipped with basic steering and suspension for added realism. Miniature fans and Jetex pellets, which are capable of issuing air jets or chemical exhaust, were attached to the undersides to simulate dust trails. Another of Meddings' inventions was a closed, cyclical effects stage nicknamed the "rolling road": a painted diorama consisting of two or more loops of canvas running at different speeds, this device allowed shots of apparently moving vehicles to be filmed on a static set to make more efficient use of the limited studio space. Airborne aircraft sequences were similarly filmed against a "rolling sky", with smoke fanned across to simulate passing clouds. However some flying sequences - such as the landings of Thunderbirds 1 and 2 at emergency sites - still required the models to be 'hand-flown' by operators who guided the models which were suspended by wires from a cruciform support/control frame.

Meddings' "rolling-road" set made its first appearance in the pilot episode "Trapped in the Sky" where it was showcased in the climactic sequence in which the crippled Fireflash airliner attempts an emergency landing with the assistance of International Rescue's Elevator Cars - and the results so impressed Lou Grade that he immediately approved the expansion of the episode from 30 minutes to a full hour. The rolling-road and rolling-sky sets were typical of Meddings' 'lateral thinking' approach to filming miniature effects - they provided major practical and aesthetic advantages that significantly reduced costs and filming time while greatly enhancing the visual realism and excitement of such action sequences. Meddings and his team knew that trying to physically 'fly' or 'drive' a miniature model through a fixed set with wires or rods produced results that were often unconvincing. This approach typically required large sets, took multiple takes and camera/lighting setups, the miniatures were difficult to film effectively, and it was hard to disguise the fact that the object on screen was simply a model on a wire. In the case of the Fireflash emergency landing sequence it would (at that time) arguably have been almost impossible to film the sequence in any other way, given that it was an elaborately choreographed sequence involving four miniatures moving in multiple directions along a 'runway' at high speed. By reversing the concept entirely - suspending the models in a fixed position and filming them against a moving continuous surface - it was relatively easy to shoot the miniatures from angles that would hide their control attachments, and virtually eliminated the 'wobbly' extraneous motions that usually detracted from the realism. Another major advantage of this technique was that it greatly simplified the work of the lighting and camera crews, making it possible to keep the models well-lit and in sharp focus at all times. Any motion of the models themselves was usually limited to small amounts of carefully-controlled lateral or vertical movement; additional motion effects could be simulated by blowing smoke or dust across the set in the opposite direction to the apparent direction of the miniature's movement, and by slowly tracking and/or zooming the camera past, towards or away from the model. Meddings' team also devised a convincing method to simulate a substantial road vehicle driving at speed by dusting the miniature road surface with a compound called fuller's earth and fitting the model cars and trucks with small gas 'puffer' devices that blew the dust from under the vehicle.

One of Meddings' first tasks was to shoot stock footage of the "Thunderbird" machines and the series' main locations, Tracy Island and Creighton-Ward Mansion. The finished island model was a composite of more than a dozen smaller sets that could be detached from the whole and filmed separately. The architecture of the mansion was based on that of Stourhead House, located on the Stourhead Estate in Wiltshire. In the absence of head designer Reg Hill, who was serving as associate producer, Meddings was further tasked with designing the "Thunderbird" fleet and FAB 1. Scale models for the six main vehicles were built by a contractor, Master Models of Middlesex. Models and puppet sets combined, more than 200 versions of the "Thunderbird" machines were created for the series.

During the designing and filming process, Meddings' first priorities were realism and credibility. With the exception of "Thunderbird 5", each vehicle was built in three or four scales. Meddings' swing-wing concept for "Thunderbird 1" was inspired by his wish to create something "more dynamic" than a fixed-wing aircraft. He remained unsatisfied with the prototype of "Thunderbird 2" until he inverted the wings, later commenting, "... at the time, all aircraft had swept-back wings. I only did it to be different." This decision was made out of personal preference and was not informed by any expert knowledge on Meddings' part. He described the "Thunderbird 2" launch as "probably the most memorable" sequence that his team devised for an APF production.

The largest model of "Thunderbird 3", whose design was based on the Soviet "Soyuz" rocket, was {{Convert|6|ft|spell=in}} tall. "Thunderbird 4" was particularly difficult to film: as the scale of the model did not correspond to the water inside the shooting tank, creative camera angles and rapid editing were used to produce a sense of realistic perspective. "Thunderbird 5", the most difficult vehicle for Meddings to visualise, was based on the Tracy Island Round House. Since most of the space station's appearances were provided by stock footage, the model was rarely filmed. Pod Vehicles were designed on an episode-by-episode basis and built from balsa wood, Jelutong wood or fibreglass. To save time and costs, other minor vehicles were built in-house from radio-controlled model kits.

As the puppets of Lady Penelope and Parker needed to fit inside, the largest of all the models was the seven-foot FAB 1, which cost £2,500 (approximately £{{Inflation|UK|2500|1964|r=-3|fmt=c}} today) to build. The Rolls-Royce's name and colour were both chosen by Sylvia Anderson. Rolls-Royce Ltd. supervised the construction of the plywood model and supplied APF with an authentic radiator grille for close-up shots of the front of the car. In exchange for its cooperation, the company requested that a Spirit of Ecstasy be fixed to the chassis and that the characters avoid referring to the brand with abbreviations such as "Rolls".

Scale explosions were created using substances such as fuller's earth, petrol gel, magnesium strips and Cordtex explosive. Originally filmed at up to 120 frames per second (f.p.s.), they were slowed down to 24 f.p.s. during post-production to increase their apparent magnitude and length. Gunpowder canisters were ignited to create rocket jets. The wires that electronically fired the rockets also allowed a member of the crew, holding a cruciform and positioned on an overhead gantry, to "fly" the model over the set. By far the most unwieldy model was "Thunderbird 2" - the large-scale miniature reportedly weighed 9 kilograms and Meddings remembered it as being "awful" to fly. A combination of unreliable rockets and weak wiring frequently caused problems: should the former be slow to ignite, the current quickly caused the latter to overheat and snap, potentially damaging the model and even setting fire to the set. Conditions above the studio floor were often dangerous due to the heat and smoke. Although many of the exhaust sound effects used in the series were drawn from an audio library, some were specially recorded during a Red Arrows display at RAF Little Rissington in Gloucestershire.

By 1966, Meddings' commitments were split between Series Two and "Thunderbirds Are Go". While Meddings worked on the film, camera operator Jimmy Elliott assumed the responsibility of directing the TV effects. By this stage, the basic frame of "Thunderbird 2" had been damaged so many times that the model had needed to be rebuilt from scratch. Meddings was displeased with the result, reflecting that the replacement was "not only the wrong colour, it was a completely different shape ... I never felt our model-makers managed to recapture the look of the original."

Critic David Garland suggests that the challenge facing the "Thunderbirds" effects department was to strike a balance between the "conventional science-fiction imperative of the 'futuristic'" and the "seeping hyper-realist concerns mandated by the Andersons' approach to the puppets". "Thunderbirds" has been praised for the quality of its effects. Jim Sangster and Paul Condon, writers of "Collins Telly Guide", consider the model work "uniformly impressive". To Paul Cornell, Martin Day and Keith Topping, writers of "The Guinness Book of Classic British TV", the effects are "way beyond anything seen on TV previously". Impressed by their work on "Thunderbirds", film director Stanley Kubrick hired several members of Meddings' staff to supervise the effects shooting for "2001: A Space Odyssey".
